Add ADR035: User info fetcher CRD changes (#532)
stackabletech/documentation: modules/contributor/pages/adr/ADR035-user-info-fetcher.adoc

= ADR035: User info fetcher CRD changes
Sebastian Bernauer <sebastian.bernauer@stackable.tech>
v0.1, 2024-01-22
:status: [draft]

* Status: {status}
* Date: 2024-01-22

Technical Story: https://github.com/stackabletech/opa-operator/issues/478

== Context and Problem Statement

From the https://docs.stackable.tech/home/nightly/opa/usage-guide/user-info-fetcher[documentation for user-info-fetcher]:

> The User info fetcher allows for additional information to be obtained from the configured backend (for example, Keycloak). You can then write Rego rules for OpenPolicyAgent which make an HTTP request to the User info fetcher and make use of the additional information returned for the username or user id.

We need to design a CRD change for users to enable the UIF.

== Considered Options

=== Stand-alone CRD

We could create a new CRD, e.g. UserInfoFetcher and have a controller for it that creates a DaemonSet.

> A OpaCluster would than be able to link to a UserInfoFetcher discovery ConfigMap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An OpaCluster would then be able to link to a UserInfoFetcher discovery ConfigMap.
```

* Good, because a UIF instance can be shared across multiple OPA clusters -> Simple and improved caching
* Bad, because OPA clusters would need to authenticate against UIF clusters.
* Bad, because UIF might need some form of authorization as well

=== Integrate in OpaCluster

> Add a new section to OpaCluster that allows users to spin up a UIF as a sidecar within the Opa DaemonSet.

Reviewer: technically...

```suggestion
Add a new section to OpaCluster that allows users to spin up a UIF as a sidecar within the Opa DaemonSet's Pods.
```

> The CRD is mostly copied from the `oidc` AuthenticationClass introduced in xref:adr/ADR032-oidc-support.adoc[] with the addition of needed credentials for Keycloak as well as the admin and user realm and a very simplistic cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CRD is mostly copied from the `oidc` AuthenticationClass introduced in xref:adr/ADR032-oidc-support.adoc[] with the addition of needed credentials for Keycloak as well as the _admin_ and _user_ realms and a very simplistic cache.
```

> The cache will be probably extended in the future (e.g. max number of entries or users that should not be cached), which can be done in a non-breaking fashion below `spec.clusterConfig.userInfo.backend.keycloak.cache`.`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cache might be extended in the future (e.g. to set the maximum number of cache entries or exempt particular users from being cached), which can be done in a non-breaking fashion below `spec.clusterConfig.userInfo.backend.keycloak.cache`.`
```

or if it really is probable:

```suggestion
The cache will probably be extended in the future (e.g. to set the maximum number of cache entries or exempt particular users from being cached), which can be done in a non-breaking fashion below `spec.clusterConfig.userInfo.backend.keycloak.cache`.`
```

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: opa.stackable.tech/v1alpha1
kind: OpaCluster
metadata:
  name: opa
spec:
  image:
    productVersion: 0.57.0
  clusterConfig:
    userInfo:
      backend:
        keycloak:
          hostname: keycloak.my-namespace.svc.cluster.local
          port: 8443
          tls:
            verification:
              server:
                caCert:
                  secretClass: tls
          clientCredentialsSecret: user-info-fetcher-client-credentials
          adminRealm: master
          userRealm: master
          cache: # optional, enabled by default
            entryTimeToLive: 60s # optional, defaults to 60s
  servers:
    roleGroups:
      default: {}
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: user-info-fetcher-client-credentials
stringData:
  clientId: user-info-fetcher
  clientSecret: user-info-fetcher-client-secret
----

> * Good, because only accessible via loopback to OPA clusters -> No authentication or authorization needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Good, because only accessible via the loopback network interface to OPA clusters -> No authentication or authorization needed.
```

_just to disambiguate from some other kind of loopback device_
